[Blog Post] Adaptive Refresh for Resilient Segment Replication (#4000)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-11-12-adaptive-refresh-for-resilient-segment-replication.md

meta_description: This blog dives into the searcher refresh mechanism in Lucene, how adaptive refresh works, and the strategies to implementing it successfully in a highly replicated search engine.
excerpt: Segment replication is a powerful index replication strategy for high QPS workloads that allows physical isolation and decoupling of indexing and search workloads, rapid replica failovers, and seamless point in time restores. However, this efficiency comes with its own unique challenges. During high indexing bursts, or if replication gets delayed due to network issues, the system can accummulate large replication checkpoints. Searchers (replica shards) struggle to absorb these checkpoints experiencing high page faults, thrashing for in-flight queries, and degraded search performance. This blog describes how to address these issues and build a resilient segment replicated system using Lucene's powerful new hooks for "Adaptive Refresh". 
---

*It is a truth universally acknowledged that a highly available system, in possession of high QPS traffic, must be in want of a resilient replication strategy.*

> Highly replicated systems are the foundation of modern distributed computing. In search engines, this typically means serving the same index on a large number of 'searcher' instances or replicas. By distributing query traffic across these replicas, we can scale the service beyond the throughput of a single instance. Further, provisioning replicas on geographically separated physical instances helps with high availability – one bad instance does not take the service down, and the service can survive outage in a data center.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Highly replicated systems are the foundation of modern distributed computing. In search engines, this typically means serving the same index on a large number of 'searcher' instances or replicas. By distributing query traffic across these replicas, we can scale the service beyond the throughput of a single instance. Further, provisioning replicas on geographically separated physical instances helps with high availability---one bad instance does not take the service down, and the service can survive a data center outage.
```

With this approach, a document is indexed only once. We save precious computation resources on replicas, and instead leverage the network to copy (replicate) index changes across the entire fleet. By tracking replication checkpoints, we can make sure that each replica is on the same point-in-time view of the index, as opposed to document replication where each replica may index at its own pace. There's also the nice ability to rollback to a known older "good checkpoint" should some bad index changes make their way to production.

## A typical segment replication setup

> In classic 'segment replicated' systems, indexers invoke a Lucene `commit` and create segments at fixed time intervals. Each commit is then treated as a replication checkpoint and copied over to replica instances. The frequency of creating checkpoints on indexers is pre-configured, based on the acceptable tolerance for propagating updates.  On receiving a new checkpoint, replicas compare it to their local state, fetch any missing files, and invoke a Lucene `refresh`, so that queries can see the updated index. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In classic "segment replicated" systems, indexers invoke a Lucene `commit` and create segments at fixed time intervals. Each commit is then treated as a replication checkpoint and copied over to replica instances. The frequency of creating checkpoints on indexers is preconfigured based on the acceptable tolerance for propagating updates. Upon receiving a new checkpoint, replicas compare it to their local state, fetch any missing files, and invoke a Lucene `refresh` so that queries can see the updated index. 
```

In well architected systems, indexer and replicas are decoupled via remote storage. Indexers publish periodic checkpoints to a remote store (like s3). Replicas poll the store and fetch the latest available checkpoint. Remote stores provide durability; if a replica crashes or restarts, it can fetch and load the latest checkpoint. It also decouples indexers and replicas: indexers can continue to publish checkpoints at a fixed pace without getting held up by lags or issues on replicas. 

> Before we go any further, it's worth understanding how Lucene manages searcher refreshes, which forms the basis of segment replicated systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we go any further, it's worth understanding how Lucene manages searcher refreshes, which forms the basis of segment-replicated systems.
```

**Let's walk through a concrete timeline to see how requests behave during a refresh:**

```ruby
[t0] STATE current=Searcher(S0 on commit=C0)
[t0] REQ-1 "GET /search?q=shoes"  acquire -> S0   refCount[S0]=1   serving commit C0
[t0] REQ-2 "GET /search?q=books"  acquire -> S0   refCount[S0]=2   serving commit C0

[t1] New checkpoint is received with commit C1

[t2] REFRESH start, download commit C1
[t2] REFRESH build Searcher S1 on commit C1

[t2] REQ-3  arrives before swap acquire -> S0   refCount[S0]=3   serving commit C0
[t2] REFRESH swap current S0 -> S1  (atomic)
[t2] STATE  current=Searcher(S1 on commit=C1); S0 still alive (refCount[S0]=2)

[t3] REQ-4  arrives after swap  acquire -> S1   refCount[S1]=1   serving commit C1
[t4] REQ-5  arrives after swap  acquire -> S1   refCount[S1]=2   serving commit C1

[t5] REQ-1  release(S0)   refCount[S0]=2
[t6] REQ-2  release(S0)   refCount[S0]=1  
[t6] REQ-3  release(S0)   refCount[S0]=0  -> close S0 and R0
[t7] REQ-4  release(S1)   refCount[S1]=1
[t8] REQ-5  release(S1)   refCount[S1]=0  (S1 stays current)

[t8] STATE  current=Searcher(S1 on commit=C1)
```

> ## Real World Challenges at Scale

Reviewer 2: Sentence case for subhead

> ## Real world challenges at scale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Real-world challenges at scale
```

> As with all things distributed, the real challenges show up at scale. The classic single-commit model has a cliff. Replicas jump from “current” to “latest” in one step. If your indexer gets a burst of updates, during high traffic season for example, the checkpoint created at a point in time can be quite large. Replicas then have to pay the cost of loading these large checkpoints in a single shot. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with all things distributed, the real challenges show up at scale. The classic single-commit model has a cliff. Replicas jump from "current" to "latest" in one step. If your indexer gets a burst of updates, during a high-traffic season for example, the checkpoint created at a point in time can be quite large. Replicas then have to pay the cost of loading these large checkpoints in a single shot. 
```

Similarly, highly available systems are often replicated across geographical regions. Replication then depends on cross region bandwidth and round trip time. If the delta between a replica’s current commit and the checkpoint is large, the transfer takes longer and the refresh applies a big change in one step. Pulling a large delta, materializing many new segment files, and refreshing the searcher can create a burst of page faults and cause latency spikes.  

> When the gap between checkpoints absorbed by the replica is large, you pay the whole cost at once, which can lead to page faults, thrashing, search request timeouts, and unstable systems. In this post we introduce a novel technique of turning this cliff into a staircase - using a combination of *‘bite-sized commits’* on indexers and *‘adaptive refresh’* on replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the gap between checkpoints absorbed by the replica is large, you pay the whole cost at once, which can lead to page faults, thrashing, search request timeouts, and unstable systems. In this post we introduce a novel technique of turning this cliff into a staircase, using a combination of *bite-sized commits* on indexers and *adaptive refresh* on replicas.
```

**Let's make this concrete with an example:**
Consider a writer that produces a sequence of commits: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A replica is currently on commit 1, happily serving queries. Due to transient network issues, replication gets delayed and checkpoint 2 takes a while to propagate to replicas. Meanwhile, indexers continue to process updates, push checkpoints to the remote store and are now on checkpoint 7. Since we always replicate the latest commit, the next checkpoint contains commit 7.

Replica receives this checkpoint and attempts to refresh on commit 7. High update traffic and merge activity on indexers can cause the index in commit 7 to be significantly different from commit 1. This is not unreasonable, after all, we did just skip through five commits worth of indexing activity. While this may seem efficient in theory – one download, one refresh, and the replica is up to date, refreshing on a large chunk of new index segments can significantly stress the system. 

> The OS page cache must load a large volume of fresh data, triggering page faults to temporarily evict existing pages. As we noted earlier though, searcher managers in Lucene make sure existing in-flight queries complete with the same searcher they started on. So even if parts of the index are obsolete for the new post-refresh searcher, they will still be used by queries that are already underway on the old searcher. This creates a memory contention, which leads to page faults, thrashing, noticeable latency spikes and eventually search request timeouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OS page cache must load a large volume of fresh data, triggering page faults to temporarily evict existing pages. As we noted earlier, though, searcher managers in Lucene make sure existing in-flight queries complete with the same searcher they started on. So even if parts of the index are obsolete for the new post-refresh searcher, they will still be used by queries that are already underway on the old searcher. This creates a memory contention, which leads to page faults, thrashing, noticeable latency spikes, and, eventually, search request timeouts.
```

The single-checkpoint method forces each replica to absorb all accumulated changes in one step. It's simple and correct, but when the gap between checkpoints absorbed by the replica is large, you pay the whole cost at once. This cliff-like behavior is exactly what we set out to smooth out.

## Bite-sized commits and adaptive refresh

With *“bite-sized commits”*, we rethink how checkpoints are constructed and consumed. Instead of bundling only the newest commit, the writer now keeps a small rolling history of commits and publishes them together as a single checkpoint. On the search side, replicas receive a set of commits instead of a single one. They can step through those commits incrementally, downloading manageable deltas and refreshing in small, predictable cycles. 

> Keen readers would note however, that Lucene’s `refreshIfNeeded` API only refreshed on the latest commit by default. We [contributed changes](https://github.com/apache/lucene/pull/14443) to Lucene, that allow `SearcherManager` (and related classes) to intelligently select the candidate commit for refresh. Consumer implementations can add logic to select the right commit, like calculating the bytes difference between current searcher commit and available commits, and selecting the newest commit that fits in the available searcher memory. Replicas can thus *adaptively refresh* on the bite sized commits. If all commits are small enough, they can directly jump to the latest one. At the other extreme, they can incrementally step through all provided commits. These changes are available as part of Lucene 10.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keen readers would note, however, that Lucene's `refreshIfNeeded` API only refreshed on the latest commit by default. We [contributed changes](https://github.com/apache/lucene/pull/14443) to Lucene that allow `SearcherManager` (and related classes) to intelligently select the candidate commit for refresh. Consumer implementations can add logic to select the right commit, like calculating the byte difference between the current searcher commit and available commits and selecting the newest commit that fits in the available searcher memory. Replicas can thus *adaptively refresh* on the bite-sized commits. If all commits are small enough, they can directly jump to the latest one. At the other extreme, they can incrementally step through all provided commits. These changes are available as part of Lucene 10.3.
```

> ### Setting up Indexers for Bite Sized Commits

Reviewer 2: Sentence case for subhead

On the indexer side, Lucene's IndexWriter continues to operate as before, creating commits on the indexer machine, though you may want to consider increasing commit frequency to keep each commit as a smaller differential from the previous one. For example, instead of creating a commit every minute, you can consider creating one every 15 seconds, giving you 4 incremental hops per minute window that a replica can chose from. Note that this is one of many possible approaches. Another, better way is to accurately trigger commits whenever segment turnover exceeds a configured threshold size.

> `IndexWriters` are configured with an `IndexDeletionPolicy` to clean up older commits that are no longer needed. The default is `KeepOnlyLastCommitDeletionPolicy`, which only retains the most recent commit. Since we want to hold multiple commits in our checkpoint, we must use a different index deletion policy. Lucene offers `KeepLastNCommitsDeletionPolicy` to keep last N commits. You can also write your own deletion policy based on specific business requirements, like keeping all commits within a time window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`IndexWriters` are configured with an `IndexDeletionPolicy` to clean up older commits that are no longer needed. The default is `KeepOnlyLastCommitDeletionPolicy`, which only retains the most recent commit. Since we want to hold multiple commits in our checkpoint, we must use a different index deletion policy. Lucene offers `KeepLastNCommitsDeletionPolicy` to keep the last N commits. You can also write your own deletion policy based on specific business requirements, like keeping all commits within a specified time window.
```

Finally, your replication checkpoint should be updated to include all the commits you want bundled together — typically all commits currently available in the index, since your configured deletion policy will already handle cleanup of commits that fall outside the retention window.

With this foundation, we set up our indexers to publish multi-commit checkpoints, enabling replicas to make intelligent, adaptive refresh decisions.

### Changes on replicas for adaptive refresh

> The replica now receives a set of commits with each checkpoint. Our goal is still to finally refresh on the latest commit. However, instead of directly jumping to the latest commit, replica can now plan its path through a series of commits that are safe to refresh on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The replica now receives a set of commits with each checkpoint. Our goal is still to finally refresh on the latest commit. However, instead of directly jumping to the latest commit, the replica can now plan its path through a series of commits that are safe to refresh on.
```

> With 10.3, Lucene added a `RefreshCommitSupplier` interface that users can implement to specify the strategy for selecting the commit to refresh on. A simple approach could be a “threshold” based strategy, where you define a static threshold based on the memory available in your runtime environment, find the ‘bytes delta’ between current searcher commit and available commits, and select the latest commit that has a delta below the threshold. Each Lucene commits is uniquely identified by a (`long`) commit generation id, with newer commits being assigned higher generation ids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With 10.3, Lucene added a `RefreshCommitSupplier` interface that users can implement to specify the strategy for selecting the commit to refresh on. A simple approach could be a threshold-based strategy, where you define a static threshold based on the memory available in your runtime environment, find the "bytes delta" between the current searcher commit and available commits, and select the latest commit that has a delta below the threshold. Each Lucene commit is uniquely identified by a (`long`) commit generation ID, with newer commits being assigned higher generation IDs.
```

**1) Start with only fetching lightweight commit metadata**
The replica first downloads only lightweight commit metadata — the `segments_N` and `.si` (segment info) files for all commits present in a checkpoint. These files describe the index structure and segments referenced by each commit, but are tiny compared to the full segment data.

**2) Calculate commit diffs**
Using commit metadata, the replica creates a list of *new* segment files that a commit brings in. The size of these files gives us the new bytes that each commit is bringing into the index. This is the “commit diff” that we use in our refresh commit selection strategy. By maintaining a simple metadata file in checkpoints, that holds the size of each segment file, we can calculate this commit diff without actually downloading any segment files yet!

**3) Select optimal commit for refresh**
Using our example of a threshold based selection strategy, replica evaluates the commit diffs for each available commit, and selects the newest commit that is below the threshold. Once a commit is identified for refresh, replica downloads all the files referenced by that commit and refreshes on it.

> It is worth mentioning that you’ll need to handle the edge case where none of the commits are below your statically defined threshold, which could happen due massive update storms even in the best effort-15 second window, or aggressive merges that lead to segment files greater than the defined threshold.  We have found that simply falling back to picking up the next commit is the safest path forward in such instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is worth mentioning that you'll need to handle the edge case of none of the commits being below your statically defined threshold, which could happen due to massive update storms, even in the best-effort 15-second window, or aggressive merges that lead to segment files greater than the defined threshold. We have found that simply falling back to picking up the next commit is the safest path forward in such instances.
```

### How this looks in action

Let’s ground this theory in what a real life adaptive refresh scenario looks like. We start with the following setup:

* **Writer commits:** 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 (latest)
* **Replica:** Currently on commit **1**
* **Checkpoint:** Includes commits [1–7], representing the last 30 minutes of activity
* **Threshold:** 5 GB

#### **Pass 1 (current searcher commit = 1, latest commit = 7):**

Check deltas vs current (1), walking from newest to oldest commit:

```ruby
    * Δ(7, 1) = 11 GB > 5 → skip
    * Δ(6, 1) = 9 GB > 5 → skip
    * Δ(5, 1) = 6 GB > 5 → skip
    * Δ(4, 1) = 5 GB ≤ 5 → select commit 4
```

The newest commit with a delta below our threshold of 5gb is **“commit 4”**. We download files for that commit and refresh the searcher on it.

#### **Pass 2 (current searcher commit = 4, latest commit = 7):**

Since we are not on the latest commit yet, we run through the loop again. This time however, searcher is on commit=4, and so the bytes delta with subsequent commits is smaller.

```ruby
    * Δ(7, 4) = 6 GB > 5 → skip
    * Δ(6, 4) = 5 GB ≤ 5 → select commit 6
```

> We find that “commit 6” is now within our safe to refresh threshold of 5GB. We download relevant files and refresh on commit 6, bringing our searcher closer to the latest commit in checkpoint. Replica can also delete the now unused segment files from the old point-in-time searcher, freeing up some disk space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We find that "commit 6" is now within our safe-to-refresh threshold of 5 GB. We download relevant files and refresh on commit 6, bringing our searcher closer to the latest commit in the checkpoint. The replica can also delete the now unused segment files from the old point-in-time searcher, freeing up some disk space.
```

#### **Pass 3 (current searcher commit = 6, latest commit = 7):**

Running through the same loop, we now find that “commit=7” is now conveniently within our safe to refresh threshold. We fetch and refresh on the commit, thus getting our searchers on the freshest data for the index.

```ruby
    * Δ(7, 6) = 3 GB ≤ 5 → select commit 7
```

Thus, instead of one big jump, the replica moves in bounded bites, each refresh capped by a size threshold, instead of a single 11 GB transfer, the replica progresses through three smaller steps of 5 GB, 5 GB, and 3 GB. Even though the total new bytes are more (13 GB in this case), each individual refresh is smaller and cheaper, and the system avoids sharp spikes in network, memory, or CPU load.

With a low OS page cache churn, we see fewer page faults and more stable latency for search requests. The entire process is idempotent, retry-able and resilient to transient failures. Since all intermediate states are valid Lucene commits, you can resume refreshing from the last commit point. Additionally, refreshing again on a commit point that the searcher is already on is a no-op and does not impact the system.

> Astute readers might wonder why we don’t simply checkpoint more frequently and continue using the single-commit checkpoints. This is done to enable refresh efficiencies. Single commit checkpoints (even with small commits) require replicas to iterate through all checkpoints as it catches up to the latest changes. With multiple commits in the same checkpoint, we can evaluate them together using common checkpoint metadata and intelligently decide the commits to refresh on. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astute readers might wonder why we don't simply checkpoint more frequently and continue using the single-commit checkpoints. This is done to enable refresh efficiencies. Single-commit checkpoints (even with small commits) require replicas to iterate through all checkpoints as they catch up to the latest changes. With multiple commits in the same checkpoint, we can evaluate them together using common checkpoint metadata and intelligently decide which commits to refresh on. 
```

![Adaptive Refresh](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-11-12-adaptive-refresh-for-resilient-segment-replication/main_image.png){:class="img-centered"}

## Conclusion

> Large checkpoint jumps in segment-replicated systems create a fundamental tension: you want replicas to catch up quickly, but absorbing too much change at once can destabilize the system. The traditional approach of always replicating the latest commit creates a cliff — when replicas fall behind, they must pay the full cost in one painful step, with page faults, latency spikes, and ultimately, timed out search requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large checkpoint jumps in segment-replicated systems create a fundamental tension: you want replicas to catch up quickly, but absorbing too much change at once can destabilize the system. The traditional approach of always replicating the latest commit creates a cliff---when replicas fall behind, they must pay the full cost in one painful step, with page faults, latency spikes, and, ultimately, timed out search requests.
```
